---
layout: page
title: Introduction
nav_order: 2
excerpt: An introduction explaining annotation methods and goals.
---
    

*The Original Sacred Harp*, now over a century old, profoundly impacted the history of *The Sacred Harp*, a shape-note tunebook in print (and in active use) since 1844. Edited by a committee headed by Joseph Stephen James (1849–1931, hereafter J. S. James), and published in Atlanta in 1911, *Original Sacred Harp* competed against several rival early-twentieth-century editions of The Sacred Harp and won the widest adoption. Often called the “James book,” Original Sacred Harp is the direct progenitor of *The Sacred Harp, 1991 Edition*, the edition of the tunebook that enjoys the most widespread contemporary use by singers from Massachusetts to California, Atlanta to Sydney. [1]
 

Sacred Harp singing is an a cappella group harmony style based around singing from *The Sacred Harp*.[2] This singing practice revolves around weekend-long, annual singing conventions at which participants sit in an inward-facing hollow square (with one vocal part on each side), and a succession of leaders stand in the middle, directing the assembled “class” in selections from the tunebook. By 1900, singing conventions featuring *The Sacred Harp* extended from Georgia to Texas, and included people from a wide range of social strata and occupations. White and black men and women attended Sacred Harp singings, though most singings were racially segregated, and the tunebook editors and contributors were exclusively white. After the turn of the twentieth century, leading singers edited the first revisions of The Sacred Harp following the death of its senior compiler, Benjamin Franklin White (1800–79).
  
Several features of one of these editions, *Original Sacred Harp*, make it exceptional. Each song in *Original Sacred Harp* includes a historical note written by James. These annotations comprised the most ambitious and accessible record of the history of the songs and hymns in *The Sacred Harp* and their writers until David Warren Steel’s 2010 reference work, *The Makers of the Sacred Harp*. Although of variable accuracy, the annotations in Original Sacred Harp are a valuable source of information—and occasionally humor. They also reveal that *The Sacred Harp* had become the subject of historical study by the early twentieth century. More than a tunebook, the annotations in *Original Sacred Harp* show how *The Sacred Harp* had become the centerpiece of a tradition of singing.

James’s historical notes, *Original Sacred Harp*’s introduction, and the design of the book also hint at how Sacred Harp singing corresponded with the political and social worlds of the tunebook’s editors. The much-heralded musical conservatism of Original Sacred Harp was the result of conflict with editors of rival *Sacred Harp* editions and a conception of Sacred Harp singing that tied the tunebook to idealized memories of the antebellum South and a grand narrative of English and American Protestant thought. Less widely acknowledged, the “James book” also embraced all manner of “material modern improvement,” thanks to its editors’ desire to make Sacred Harp singing relevant to urban audiences in the industrial, modernizing “New South.”

### Revising *The Sacred Harp* in the Twentieth Century

  The “James book” was the last and most unlikely of the revisions of *The Sacred Harp* published in the early twentieth century. Its distinct character reflects shortcomings that James perceived in its predecessors; decisions made by the editors of earlier twentieth-century revisions, and the reception their books earned, help explain the form and contents of *Original Sacred Harp*.

 The 1844 *Sacred Harp* was co-edited by West Georgians Benjamin Franklin White and Elisha James King (1821–44). The tunebook uses the four-shape system of shape-notes pioneered in William Little and William Smith’s 1801 *Easy Instructor*, which pairs triangle, circle, square, and diamond shapes with the tones of the scale and the syllables “faw,” “sol,” “law,” and “me.” White supervised enlargements of the tunebook in 1850 and 1859 and a revision with a third appendix in 1870. White was at work on a fifth edition of *The Sacred Harp* when he died in 1879. Work on the new edition was suspended, throwing its future into question. 

 Two of White’s sons published *The New Sacred Harp* in 1884. Their tunebook adopted a newer seven-shape shape-note system, incorporated many “Sabbath School” songs and those written in an early gospel style, and featured new versions of songs that were originally composed in the earlier dispersed harmony style of *The Sacred Harp*, reharmonized in the sweeter, close-harmony style of gospel music. Perhaps because it seemed to stray too far from *The Sacred Harp*, The New Sacred Harp did not supplant White’s 1870 Fourth Edition, which remained in print through the 1890s. A sense prevailed, however, that a new revision of the old *Sacred Harp* was needed if the book were to remain relevant to the singing classes that met annually to use it at three- and four-day singing conventions. Upland West Georgia’s Chattahoochee Musical Convention, among the oldest of these gatherings, formed a committee in 1899 to “see the control[l]ers of the Sacred Harp and see if they will allow the book to be enlarged,” but the death of John Palmer Rees (1828–1900), a leader of the move to revise the book, stymied the effort.

The first revision of *The Sacred Harp* following Benjamin Franklin White’s death was published and printed in southeastern Alabama in early 1903, edited by Wilson Marion Cooper (1850–1916). Cooper and his associates had ties to prominent contributors to White’s nineteenth-century editions of *The Sacred Harp*, but were neither geographically nor socially close to those in the upland counties of western Georgia at the center of Sacred Harp revision activities since the Civil War, the area where the Chattahoochee Convention was held. These West Georgia singers knew of the “Cooper book,” but the edition is best understood not as an attempt to win their favor, but as a representation of the singing landscape of southeastern Alabama at the turn of the twentieth century, where Sacred Harp singing overlapped with singing from transitional early gospel songbooks like Aldine Kieffer’s *Temple Star*.

Cooper’s *Sacred Harp* included the range of music styles in use at singing conventions in southeastern Alabama, embraced hybrid musical forms, and adopted a layout that paired features of previous Sacred Harp editions with those drawn from gospel songbooks. His revision retained The Sacred Harp’s four-note shape-note system and left the preexisting harmony parts of most songs unaltered. His alterations include the addition of alto parts to all three-part songs creating a uniform four-part texture, substitution of new thematic titles drawn from the first lines of the songs’ hymn texts for the older tune names, transcription of many songs into lower keys more closely approximating piano tuning, and the addition of a number of new songs either drawn from seven-note gospel compilations or newly composed in a gospel style. Cooper also experimented with typesetting songs in the two-staff-per-brace format favored by gospel publishers.

Cooper’s revision of *The Sacred Harp* was geared toward a local audience for whom this medley of stylistic cues referenced a sacred singing culture in transition. Perhaps because this profusion of styles and songbooks was also in use across a wide swath of the US South, by mid-twentieth century, conventions in North Florida, South Georgia, South Alabama, South Mississippi, and East Texas sang from the “Cooper book.” Significantly, the book was not adopted by singings in West Georgia or Atlanta. But the publication of the “Cooper book” may have increased such singers’ sense of urgency in producing a revision for their own use.

Movement toward revising *The Sacred Harp* intensified in West Georgia around the time of the “Cooper book’s” publication, spearheaded by Atlanta lawyer, businessman, and politician J. S. James. James co-founded a convention in his former hometown of Douglasville in 1902. That same year the convention passed a resolution to revise and enlarge *The Sacred Harp*, modernize the tunebook, and consider splitting it into two books, with a smaller supplemental volume encompassing the wide range of music styles then competing for singers’ attention. The convention sent the resolution to the Chattahoochee Convention, whose secretary entered it into the convention record book and spread it in local newspapers along with the convention’s minutes. Two years later J. S. James collaborated with Benjamin Franklin White’s most musically active son, James Landrum White (1847–1925, hereafter J. L. White)—a co-editor of *The New Sacred Harp*—to found a new convention in their adopted home of Atlanta. Organized as the United Sacred Harp Musical Association (hereafter the United Convention) in 1905, the event’s leaders intended it to function as a central organization for the area’s Sacred Harp singings. James, White, and their Atlanta-area associates may have imagined this new institution as succeeding the Southern Musical Convention (an organization founded by Benjamin Franklin White in 1845) which had passed resolutions authorizing the enlargement or revision of The Sacred Harp in 1849, 1858, and 1867. In 1906 the United Convention passed just such a resolution, with language that seems to mirror the 1902 resolution of the Douglasville Convention, authorizing “revising the Sacred Harp” and compiling “other smaller music books.”

In 1909 two books were published in response to the United Convention’s call: a fifth edition of *The Sacred Harp*, edited by 
J. L. White, and *Union Harp and History of Songs*, edited by J. S. James. Union Harp included a variety of music styles, pairing songs drawn from the previous edition of *The Sacred Harp* with popular hymn-tunes in early gospel styles. *The Union Harp* editors reharmonized a handful of these Sacred Harp songs, imbuing them with stylistic elements of gospel music. The book also included a selection of newly composed songs written by active Sacred Harp singing school teachers such as brothers Thomas Jackson Denson (1863–1935) and Seaborn McDaniel Denson (1854–1936). Like the new songs found in the “Cooper book,” many of these selections featured hallmarks of early gospel styles. Union Harp also included a unique feature—an extensive historical note paired with each song. These notes included biographies of tune- and hymn-writers and emphasized the music’s ties to prominent figures, past and present, in American and European music and Protestantism.

Whereas *The Union Harp* seems to represent a response to the 1906 United Convention’s call for “other smaller music books,” J. L. White’s *Sacred Harp, Fifth Edition* seems an attempt to update and replace White’s father’s earlier editions. It likewise contains music in a variety of styles and includes tunes—written by Atlanta colleagues of White and James—that feature chromaticism and modulation to an unprecedented extent, going far beyond the 1880s style that influenced Cooper’s revision. White also corrected what he interpreted as errors in the harmony parts of Sacred Harp songs, conforming them to music theory standards taught at the Normal Music Institutes that trained many young gospel composers. Together, these changes worked to modernize *The Sacred Harp* by bringing it up to J. L. White’s conception of contemporary musical standards, which he hoped might persuade Atlantans to continue to sing from the volume. J. L. White’s Sacred Harp added few songs by the composers who contributed to Union Harp such as the Densons. Though both books were published in Atlanta and authorized by the same United Convention resolution, their contents evince their editors’ locations within overlapping, yet distinct networks of musicians.

J. S. James initially supported J. L. White’s *Sacred Harp, Fifth Edition*, but the book’s uneasy reception by Sacred Harp singers soon caused conflict between the two Atlantans and led them to edit rival Sacred Harp editions. James and White’s United Convention adopted *The Sacred Harp, Fifth Edition* for its 1910 session. Other conventions, however, declined to use the book, citing the unorthodox style of some of the new tunes White added and, especially, their composition by composers outside the conventions’ networks. Members of the Mulberry River Convention of West Alabama passed a resolution stating that they “hereby oppose the last revision of the Sacred Harp, favor the old as it stands” and requesting that “If any revision—put an addition at back [of book] as formerly with any new changes necessary without destroying the Identity of any of the songs therein. All the new compositions to be composed by old Sacred Harp singers only.” James apparently recognized that a large proportion of the Sacred Harp singing public would not accept White’s revision and so the committee he led “informed [White] that there was a general dissatisfaction with his book and fully explained to him that it would be impossible for sacred harp singers to accept [it].” Still hoping to realize the arrangement settled on by the United Convention to publish a Sacred Harp revision edited by J. L. White alongside his own *Union Harp*, James prevailed on White to try again. He did so in 1910, publishing a second Fifth Edition of *The Sacred Harp*. White’s 1910 revision largely adopted the same approach as his 1909 tunebook. The new revision restored some of the removed or altered songs in the nineteenth-century sections of *The Sacred Harp*, yet left other songs out, especially those in minor keys, replacing them with music composed in modern styles by White and his contemporaries. White also appended a sixty-two page supplement that mixed modern compositions with reharmonized versions of old songs; this time, however, he left the songs in their original form in the book as well.

Despite White’s efforts to compromise, he and James split over the 1910 *Sacred Harp, Fifth Edition*. James evidently concluded that singers would not accept White’s revision, which though tempered compared with his previous attempt, still diverged considerably from the 1870 edition. James moved to revise the book himself, assisted by musical editor Seaborn McDaniel Denson, and with the support of the committee appointed by the United Convention in 1906. Meanwhile, White and his associates obtained the support of a convention based in southeastern Alabama and North Florida to revise The Sacred Harp a third time. By early 1911 the two revisers and their committees were at work, striving to be the first to bring their competing Sacred Harp revision to market.

J. L. White’s third revision, titled *The Sacred Harp, Fourth Edition with Supplement*, made only minimal changes to the body of B. F. White’s 1870 Fourth Edition of the tunebook. A few songs in the core of the book were replaced, or reharmonized in a close-harmony style, but most remained in their original settings. White reserved most songs in the styles he seems to have favored for a seventy-four-page appendix. This section includes music with chromaticism and modulation written by White and Atlanta singer-composers in his circle; mid-nineteenth-century tunes by Lowell Mason, William Bradbury, and others that emulated European hymn tunes and new secular music styles; reharmonized versions of songs from the nineteenth-century Sacred Harp also appearing in their original form earlier in the book; and a small number of new compositions by still-living colleagues of Benjamin Franklin White, such as a song by Henry Smith Rees. The book concludes, uniquely, with a second set of rudiments in which an evidently frustrated J. L. White sought to share his philosophy of music with what he must by now have resignedly regarded as an obstinate group of traditionalists. White campaigned ardently for his book across a broad swath of the South, crisscrossing Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi to address singing conventions and teach singing schools. Singers responded, adopting the book for conventions across these three states, where it remained in wide use into the mid-twentieth century. Since then, however, its territory has markedly declined. White’s *Sacred Harp, Fourth Edition with Supplement* is sung from today east of Atlanta, where White’s descendants settled in the early twentieth century, and in parts of Mississippi.

### J. S. James and the *Original Sacred Harp*

The form and contents of *Original Sacred Harp*, J. S. James’s 1911 revision of *The Sacred Harp*, owe a great deal to the editor’s background. James’s life experiences prepared him well to furnish a socially and economically diverse white southern public with an acceptable revision of The Sacred Harp. Born in rural West Georgia’s Campbell County in 1849, James attended singing schools taught by his father, Stephen James, and by James R. Turner. After moving to Douglasville, seat of the newly established Douglas County, he embarked on a successful business and political career. At twenty-six, James, a Democrat, was elected the first mayor of Douglasville, moving on to the Georgia state legislature five years later, and then to the state senate. During the 1880s and 1890s, James edited a weekly Douglas County newspaper, the New South, and served on a variety of committees to promote industry, railroad construction, and various business ventures. An anti-Populist, James campaigned for Grover Cleveland and was rewarded with a patronage appointment as United States District Attorney for the Northern District of Georgia, leading him to move to Atlanta. James returned to singing after his retirement from political life in 1897.

James’s career was typical of the New South boosters who sought to modernize and urbanize the southeastern United States after Reconstruction. Colleagues of James in Atlanta aggressively looked forward, seeking to develop and expand business in the city. Yet this group of white men also looked back to the antebellum period with nostalgia for what they saw as a time when their standing atop the South’s social hierarchy was unchallenged. Historian Gavin James Campbell argues that such New South boosters’ musical activities sometimes expressed this ambivalence toward modernity, or assuaged anxieties about their standing in a modernizing urban context.

James’s embrace of Sacred Harp singing fits this picture of New South booster ambivalence. Participating in a musical practice he associated with his rural West Georgia youth, James attempted to modernize The Sacred Harp tunebook while emphasizing its associations with the southern antebellum past and with imagined noble histories of music and English and American Protestantism stretching back centuries. *Original Sacred Harp*’s editors affirmed this commitment by disassociating *The Sacred Harp* from a range of other musics in the volume’s preface. These musics include “secular,” perhaps a way of distinguishing the newly historicized melodies of The Sacred Harp from contemporaneous secular tunes; “operatic,” contrasting what James regarded as “manly” Sacred Harp singing with the refined and overcivilized activity of attending the annual Atlanta performances of the New York Metropolitan Opera; and “rag-time,” a term connoting syncopated dance music associated with African Americans, as well as the ostensibly similar rhythms of contemporaneous gospel music. James’s business and political success imbued him with certainty that *The Sacred Harp* had to be regularized and modernized in order to survive. His nostalgia for what he might have regarded as the simpler times of his youth helped him sympathize with the legions of largely rural singers who had rejected J. L. White’s first two revisions. James’s interest in presenting *The Sacred Harp* as a noble and significant repository of American Protestant music and establishing the book’s position at the end of a grand historical narrative served his own desire to associate himself with a venerable, muscular, Christian historical tradition.

James’s interests, typical for a prominent Atlantan of his pedigree, dovetailed with the need to produce a new revision of *The Sacred Harp* after previous attempts had failed. James’s business acumen enabled him to capitalize on feedback gleaned from the singers whose conventions had rejected White’s first two revision attempts. Although his late entry into the process of revising the book necessitated editing and publishing it as speedily as possible, it also gave James the advantageous opportunity to differentiate his book from its competitors.

James’s revision, titled *Original Sacred Harp*, was published in August 1911. The tunebook’s editors presented it as a thoroughly modern inheritor of the mantle of Sacred Harp’s history. *Original Sacred Harp* also seems structured to contrast with J. L. White’s earlier efforts. Rather than remove songs (something suggested by the Douglasville Convention resolution James himself co-authored in 1902), the United Convention committee headed by James retained all of the songs included in the 1870 Fourth Edition of The Sacred Harp, and even restored two thirds of the songs removed from the book in the nineteenth century. The tunebook’s title, *Original Sacred Harp*, referenced the restoration of music “original” to the book, and perhaps sought to sharpen the contrast with James’s competitors, who had removed and reharmonized songs. The book’s title also signified its revisers’ association of their twentieth-century *Original Sacred Harp* with its antebellum predecessor.

A testimonial on the back cover of James’s tunebook also makes clear that its revisers saw Sacred Harp singing as inheriting a tradition of sacred music in the Bible imagined as stretching back to the Old Testament. As music scholar Duncan Vinson puts it, the “testimonial clearly links the Sacred Harp cause with a longtime tenet of conservative Protestantism … a desire to purify Christianity by returning to the practices of the early church.” In large, uppercase text, the back cover asserts that

>The Music and Hymns
 >IN THE
>“Original Sacred Harp”
>THIS VOLUME ARE IN ACCORD 
>AND KEEPING WITH THE
>“SACRED MUSIC IN THE BIBLE”
>FROM JUBAL 160 A.M., 1500 YEARS BEFORE THE DELUGE
>FROM ABRAHAM, MOSES, THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL
>THE PROPHETS, LEVITES, DAVID, SOLOMON
>DOWN TO
>JESUS CHRIST
>HIS DISCIPLES AND THE FOUNDING OF HIS CHURCH
>AND TO THE PRESENT.

The editors’ twin historical aims of associating *Original Sacred Harp*’s music with antebellum culture and sacred music “from Jubal [on] to the present” appear throughout the volume in historical notes James added to every song. These notes, some of which he carried over from *Union Harp and History of Songs*, provide information on the publication history of a song’s text and tune, as well as biographical information about their authors. This effort to recover the history of the early contributors to this and other tunebooks suggests James considered the book’s history an important part of its appeal and significance. By arguing that the tunebook’s roots stretched back to the antebellum South as well as to spatially and temporally distant American and European settings, James portrayed *Original Sacred Harp* not only as an emblem of antebellum culture but also as an important American historical and cultural artifact.

James’s historical notes also reinforce *Original Sacred Harp*’s position as inheritor of a venerable sacred music tradition. In the note accompanying “Old Hundred,” James described the tune as “one of the oldest … in the books,” having “been used throughout Christendom for over 300 years.” In describing the history of the song “Happy Matches,” James provided a biography of “Lady Huntington,” referring to Selina Hastings (1707–91), the Countess of Huntingdon, who he credited with writing the song’s hymn text in 1764. James described Hastings as “one of the most pious, noble, and benevolent women whose name adorns the Christian Church,” a financial supporter of John and Charles Wesley, who was closely connected to prominent eighteenth-century preacher George Whitfield. These references, along with numerous others throughout the historical notes in *Original Sacred Harp*, contributed to James’s effort to connect the book to celebrated Protestant figures and, by extension, to a constructed history of American Protestantism and its English precedents, all reflecting an elevated musical and cultural history.

James added a number of songs to *Original Sacred Harp* that had first seen publication in *Union Harp and History of Songs*, but only those that were stylistically consistent with music already in the book. He excluded the many newly written songs in early gospel and hybrid styles similar to those found in the “Cooper book” as well as the Sabbath School songs the inclusion of which he had called for in 1902. Instead, James and his committee added songs by prominent Sacred Harp singers that emulated the music styles in the nineteenth-century editions of *The Sacred Harp*: revival choruses, fuging tunes, plain tunes, and anthems.

In his introductory statement, James described his work on *Original Sacred Harp* as an attempt to “embrace all the old features, and at the same time to get all material modern improvement.” This dual embrace of old and modern sometimes required compromises. In keeping with this commitment to historical fidelity, James’s committee largely refrained from “correcting” the harmonies of songs carried over from the 1870 Sacred Harp. Yet his committee freely reharmonized songs that had appeared in early editions of The Sacred Harp but were removed in 1870. James may have felt empowered to apply his musical standards more freely when working with previously eliminated songs due to his contemporaries’ lack of familiarity with them. And, as Cooper and White had done, he added alto parts to most songs, even those that he brought over from the old Fourth Edition.

In some songs whose harmonies remained unaltered, other changes reveal the editors’ willingness to embrace symbols of modern music. “Bound for Canaan,” a revival chorus composed by Elisha James King in 1844, appeared in James’s first printing of *Original Sacred Harp* with the song’s first note shortened from a half note to a quarter note, and the half note rest which had preceded the first note removed entirely. This subtle change brought the song into closer alignment with gospel songs, which often began with quarter or eighth note pickups. In contrast, many songs in The Sacred Harp begin with half or whole notes, providing singers an opportunity to sound a strong starting chord before launching into a succession of shorter notes as the song continues. James made similar alterations to several other songs in the first edition of *Original Sacred Harp* but restored the original half note entrances to all of these songs in a second (undated) printing of the book. Though James’s musical modernizations were less drastic than J. L. White’s, the resistance of singers to such changes likely caused both to moderate their reforms.

Much of James’s effort to depict *Original Sacred Harp* as full of “material modern improvement” centered on the book’s aesthetics, format, and technology of production. The book’s cover trumpets this fact, boasting “ALL PLATES AND EVERYTHING NEW” and adds that it is “Just Out : : : August 1911,” emphasizing the book’s contemporariness. James also promoted the book’s contemporary currency by including photographs of Atlanta’s white religious and political elite in the frontmatter. In addition to a photograph of Atlanta Tabernacle pastor Len Broughton in the first printing of the James book, a later 1929 printing added a photograph of Atlanta mayor I. N. Ragsdale, described as an active supporter of the annual United Convention. James also added a statistical table in the front of the book citing, among other things, the total number of scriptural citations for songs, the number of “words used in the book,” and “number of repeats in the book.” The inclusion of these sometimes-quirky statistics (of dubious reliability) aligned with the modernizing New South’s emphasis on industrial accounting and factbooks.

The tunebook’s new “first class” printing plates also contributed to the book’s modern presentation. The plates changed the effect of the tunebook’s appearance in three ways. The new layout, which placed the text attribution at the top left of the page and the music attribution at the top right, emulated the standard form of gospel songbooks, visually (if not musically) associating the book with this modern style. By imposing a consistent layout on all the pages in the book, the new plates also amplified the systematization the book’s statistical table suggests by rendering the appearance of the pages consistent. Finally, the new plates adopted widely used and recently designed typefaces, further contributing to the tunebook’s contemporary aesthetic.

The rush to print *Original Sacred Harp* undermined this consistency. Compared with *Union Harp*, which was designed and typeset in an identical style, *Original Sacred Harp* features less consistent typography and many more typographical errors. The pressure to print the book quickly may have led the book’s compositors to set more pages of type at a time before casting stereotyped plates, causing them to use a wider variety of printing sorts. Time pressures may have also limited the compositors’ opportunities to test print typeset pages and correct errors before casting plates. A need or desire to produce *Original Sacred Harp* cheaply may have also played a role in undermining the book’s consistency. The book’s producers corrected only the most egregious of errors for later printings, and resorted to modifying the books plates, rather than re-typesetting such pages, leading to yet more visual anomalies.

James also carried over the practice from *Union Harp* of including scriptural citations for nearly every song. An adoption of a feature of some contemporaneous gospel songbooks and thus a component of the book’s modernization, the scriptural citations also contributed to the sacralization of the tunebook. In conjunction with the prominently displayed portrait of Broughton, and historical notes that attested to the piety of the writers and composers, the scriptural citations helped *Original Sacred Harp*’s revisers to assert the book’s theological grounding—implicitly contrasting it with newer gospel songbooks and the Cooper and J. L. White revisions of *The Sacred Harp*.

*Original Sacred Harp*, like the other early-twentieth-century Sacred Harp editions with which it competed, was both conservative and modern. All these books’ editors sought to claim the authority of the nineteenth-century Sacred Harp while making a book that suited their own needs and those of their singing contemporaries. Each group of editors made different choices, both to differentiate their offering from those of competitors, and to strike a balance between modernity and conservatism their singing public would accept.

### The Reception of *Original Sacred Harp*

The “James book” speedily became the most popular of the three competing early-twentieth-century Sacred Harp editions. Conventions adopted the tunebook across a broad swath of Georgia and Alabama as well as portions of Tennessee, Mississippi, and Texas. In some places and periods, the book became the sole Sacred Harp edition in use. In other instances, the book was used alongside other songbooks or was adopted by one of a pair of rival conventions, each singing from a different Sacred Harp edition.

While some singers enjoyed singing out of multiple editions or based their choice of a particular Sacred Harp on its availability rather than their perception of its quality, others became passionate advocates for their favored editions. The revisers fought fiercely on behalf of their books. In 1914, three years after the publication of *Original Sacred Harp*, Cooper took James to court for infringing on copyright by duplicating many of the alto lines in Cooper’s 1903 Sacred Harp revision. While the judge found correctly that “the altos used in James’s book … are substantially the same as in Cooper’s book,” he nonetheless ruled in James’s favor, arguing dubiously that the alto lines were nothing more than additions “a writer of music with experience and skill might readily make.” Around the same time, James sued J. L. White for copyright infringement—arguing that White illicitly issued his 1911 *Sacred Harp, Fourth Edition* with Supplement even though the United Convention, which James asserted held the right to assign the revision of the tunebook, had given that responsibility to James and his committee. James’s lawsuit was also unsuccessful.

James and White, former friends and collaborators, waged a particularly long and hard-fought battle. The adoption of the “James book” by the United Convention in 1911 led White and his followers to “break away and begin a separate convention.” Each traveled across the South to singing conventions to speak in support of their respective editions and to sell tunebooks. Each published circulars making polemical claims about the other’s “pretended editions,” leveraging personal attacks, and arguing for the legitimacy of their own revisions. Only one such pamphlet, authored by James in 1920, survives.




James’s campaign did not vanquish White’s edition, but it may have helped secure *Original Sacred Harp* a large audience. The existence of several distinct printings of Original Sacred Harp attests to the edition’s popularity. Second and third printings, also dated 1911, were published some time between 1911 and 1921. The first of these two printings corrects numerous typographical and factual errors, restores the opening half-notes James had replaced with quarter notes in 1911, and expands on some historical notes and attributions. Later printings dated 1921 and 1929 similarly feature updates to the book’s historical notes, along with a small number of musical changes. Though substantively the same, these later printings continued to trumpet the contemporariness of *Original Sacred Harp*, boasting “Just Out : : August 1921” and “1929” respectively.




J. S. James lived the longest of the three early-twentieth-century Sacred Harp revisers, surviving Cooper and J. L. White. In the wake of his death a new generation of leaders considered combining the three competing revisions of The Sacred Harp with the hope of reunifying the tunebook’s singers. Yet even as these discussions unfolded, Paine Denson (1882–1955) published *Original Sacred Harp: Denson Revision*, a revision of the “James book” begun by his father, Thomas Jackson Denson, and his uncle, Seaborn McDaniel Denson, who had been the “James book’s” music editor. (The brothers died before the project’s completion.) The Denson brothers had both served on the revision committee of the Original Sacred Harp, and had purchased the rights to the book from James’s only surviving child after James’s death. Published during the Great Depression in a time of austerity, the “Denson book” was a slimmer volume than its predecessor. The Densons removed nearly 150 songs while adding several new compositions. Rather than re-typeset the book, Denson’s committee reused the stereotyped plates from the “James book,” adding new songs using new plates that only partially conformed to the template laid out by James, lacking historical notes and scriptural citations.

In most areas, those who had used the “James book” adopted the Denson Revision. The Densons’ new *Original Sacred Harp* also absorbed users of the “White book” in many areas during the twentieth century as no new “White book” revision materialized and copies of the revision became scarce. Even after the publication of the Denson Revision, some singers continued to use the “James book.” In an area of South Georgia stretching from Thomaston south to Albany and Cordele, singers rejected the Denson Revision because “The Saviour’s Call” had been removed from the book. The song was a favorite of Plez Hardin, the chairman of the South Georgia Convention. The convention and the two dozen annual singings under its umbrella continued to use the “James book” into the 1970s, arranging with the Sacred Harp Publishing Company—the organization that published the Denson Revision and held the rights to the “James book”—to have small runs of the edition printed around 1949 and in 1964. Even after finally adopting the Denson Revision in the 1970s, singers in the area continued to sing “The Great Roll Call,” a favorite song from the “James book” that does not appear in the Denson Revision.

New Denson Revisions published in 1960, 1966, 1971, and 1987 continued to incorporate reproductions of the 1911 “James book” plates. In 1966, revisers, led by West Georgia Sacred Harp singer Hugh W. McGraw, added historical notes and scriptural citations (features of the “James book” that had been ignored by revisers in 1936 and 1960) to pages featuring newer songs. They also updated text and tune attributions, as well as some historical notes with the aid of hymnody and music scholars. Hoping to create a cleaner page, and faced with the realization that many of James’s notes were inaccurate, the revisers of *The Sacred Harp, 1991 Edition*, again led by McGraw, removed them. The 1991 Edition also included new digitally typeset pages, standardizing and modernizing the book’s design, and finally replacing the *Original Sacred Harp* plates. The old plates were sold to interested singers to help fund the revision. Many are now displayed in singers’ homes.

While the 1991 Edition’s design was widely hailed as a great improvement, many singers bemoaned the loss of the easy access to historical information about the book’s contributors that James’s notes provided. Some contemporary singers had also appreciated James for the humor that came from his mistakes, his idiosyncratic way with words, and the sometimes surprising stories he told about the figures included in the tunebook. In his account of John Leland, author of the hymn text “O when shall I see Jesus, and reign with Him above,” which accompanies Elisha James King’s “Bound for Canaan,” James wrote,

Rev. John Leland was born in 1754 and died in 1844. He was a Baptist preacher. In 1801 he took a preaching tour from his home in Massachusetts to Washington with his Cheshire cheese, which made his name national on account of that trip. … The farmers of Cheshire, for whom he was pastor, conceived the idea of sending the biggest cheese in America to President Jefferson. Mr. Leland offered to go to Washington with an ox team with it and preach along the way, which he did. The cheese weighed 1,450 pounds. He died with great hope of rest in the glory world.

This note led some singers to adopt the name “cheese notes” for James’s annotations. Undeniably comical, the propensity of the notes to encourage jokes at the tunebook’s expense, along with the uneven display of pages after seventy-five years of additions and substitutions, was embarrassing to the tunebook’s revisers, in whose cultural context Sacred Harp singing was often regarded as “old fogy.” The revisers promised to publish a companion volume with corrected notes on each song and author. The process of preparing the promised companion volume took longer than originally anticipated, but the book, written by musicologist David Warren Steel with hymnody scholar Richard H. Hulan, and published in 2010 as *The Makers of the Sacred Harp*, represents a herculean research effort. Along with a number of short essays describing aspects of the tunebook’s history, contents, and proponents, the book includes concise, thoroughly researched, and engagingly written biographical entries on the hymn- and tune-writers featured in *The Sacred Harp, 1991 Edition* and helpful information on the songs themselves. Published by the University of Illinois Press with subventions from the Sacred Harp Publishing Company and the Joe Beasley Memorial Foundation, *The Makers of the Sacred Harp* signals its affiliation with the legacy of the “James book” by focusing exclusively on those songs and authors featured in its most recent successor, the 1991 Edition.
